# Use and Abuse of Numbers

## Cherry Picking

▪ Often, when a company promotes a product, they will undertake studies to “prove” the product’s effectiveness.

For e.g.
let say comapny has conducted 40 studies with a confidence level of 95%, so you might think that the analysis would be fairly robust. But they could produce one study showing it was beneficial, one showin it was harmful and 38 were inconclusive. Then that 38 equates to the 95%.

▪ So the company could be very selective and cherry-pick the results.

This is a type of misuse that we sometimes see with tobacco campanies, and some pharmaceutical companies arguably, promoting miracle pills.

## Loaded Questions

▪ The manner in which questions are phrased can have a massive impact on the way an audience answers them.

▪ Specific wording patterns have a persuasive effect, and influence respondents to answer in a predictable manner.

For e.g.
    1. Do you believe that you should be taxed so the other people don't have to work?
    OR
    2. Do you think that the government should help those people who can't find work?

▪ The question should be posed in a neutral way.

For e.g.
    1. What is your point regarding unemployment assistance?
    This question will ensure that the person being polled has no way of guessing from the wording what the questioner might want to hear.
    2. Do yoiu support the UK attempting to bring freedom and democracy to other countries in the world?
    3. Do you support the unprovoked military action by the UK?

▪ Another unfair method of polling is to preced the question with a conditional statement or a statement of fact.

For e.g.
    1. Given the rising costs to the middle class, do you support government assistance program?

## Overgeneralization

▪ **_Overgeneralization_** is a logical fallacy that
occurs when a conclusion about a group is
drawn from an unrepresentative sample,
especially a sample that is too small or too
narrow.

For e.g.
    There are common overgeneralizations regarding certain religions or races.
    a. All Jews are rich
    b. All Blacks are good athletes.
    c. All french are rudes.
    d. All Mexicans are lazy.

These are basically sterotypes of certain groups of people.

## Biased Samples

▪ Sampling bias is a bias in which a sample is collected
in such a way that some members of the intended
population are less likely to be included than others.

## Correlation and Causation

▪ In statistics, many statistical tests calculate the
correlation between variables, and when two
variables are found to be correlated, it is tempting to
assume that this shows that one variable causes the
other.
▪ However, correlation does not imply causation!!

## Statistical vs. Practical Significance

▪ Statistical significance is concerned with whether
a research result is due to chance or sampling
variability.
▪ Practical significance is concerned with whether
the result is large enough to be of value in the real
world.

## Data Dredging

▪ Data dredging (sometimes called “data fishing”,
“data snooping”, and “p-hacking”) is the misuse of
data analysis to find patterns in data that can be
presented as statistically significant when in fact
there is no real underlying effect.
▪ “p-hacking” is when a data scientist analyses and
presents the data in a way that supports preconceived
answers.
– They know that by selectively munging, binning,
constraining, cleansing, and sub-segmenting data,
they can get it to tell almost any story or validate
almost any “fact”.